Where's the king?
Contending with the fretful elements.
Bids the winds blow the Earth into the sea
or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
that things might change or cease.
Sir, I do know you and dare,
upon the warrant of my note, commend a dear thing to you.
There is division, although as yet,
the face of it is covered with mutual cunning,
'twixt Albany and Cornwall.
But, true it is, from France, there comes a power
into this scattered kingdom
who already, wise in our negligence,
have secret feet in some of our best ports
and are at point to show their open banner.
Now, sir, to you.
If, on my credit, you dare build so far
to make your speed to Dover,
you shall find some that will thank you,
making just report
of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
the king hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding
and, from some knowledge and assurance,
offer this office to you.
I will talk further with you.
No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more than my out-wall,
open this purse, and take what it contains.
If you should see Cordelia as fear not but you shall
show her this ring, and she will tell you
who that fellow is that yet you do not know.
Fie on this storm.
I'll go seek the king.
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks!
Rage!
Blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout till you have drenched
our steeples, drowned the cocks!
You sulfurous and thought-executing fires,
vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
singe my white head!
And you, all-shaking thunder,
strike flat the thick rotundity o' the world!
Crack nature's molds, all germens spill at once
that make ingrateful man!
Nuncle, court holy-water in a dry house
is better than this rain-water out o' door.
Good nuncle, in.
Ask thy daughters' blessing.
Here's a night pities neither wise men nor fools.
Rumble thy bellyful!
Spit, fire! Spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters.
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
I never gave you kingdom, called you children.
You owe me no subscription.
Then let fall your horrible pleasure.
Here I stand, your slave;
a poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man.
And yet I call you servile ministers
that will with two pernicious daughters
join your high engendered battles
'gainst a head so old and white as this.
Oh.
'Tis foul.
He that has a house to put his head in
has a good head-piece.
No.
I will be the pattern of all patience.
I will say nothing.
Who's there?
Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece.
That's a wise man and a fool.
Alas, sir, are you here?
Things that love night love not such nights as these.
The wrathful skies gallow the very wanderers of the night
and make them keep their caves.
Since I was man, such sheets of fire,
such bursts of horrid thunder,
such groans of roaring wind and rain,
I never remember to have heard.
Man's nature cannot carry the affliction nor the fear.
Let the great gods
that keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads
find out their enemies now.
Tremble, thou wretch, that hath within thee
undivulged crimes, unwhipped of justice.
Hide thee, thou bloody hand.
Thou perjured, and thou simular man
of virtue that art incestuous.
Caitiff, to pieces shake,
that under covert and convenient seeming
hath practiced on man's life.
Close pent-up guilts, rive your concealing continents,
and cry these dreadful summoners grace.
I am a man more sinned against than sinning!
Alack, bare-headed.
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.
Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
Repose you there while I to this hard house贸
more harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised,
which, even but now, demanding after you,
denied me to come in
return and force their scanted courtesy.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on, my boy.
How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself.
Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange
that can make vile things precious.
Come, your hovel.
Poor fool and knave,
I have one part in my heart that's sorry yet for thee.
He that hath and a little tiny wit贸
with a hey, ho, the wind and the rain贸
must make content with his fortunes fit,
for the rain, it raineth every day.
True, my good boy.
Come, bring us to your hovel.
This is a brave night to cool a courtesan.
I'll speak a prophecy ere I go.
When priests are more in word than matter,
when brewers mar their malt with water,
when nobles are their tailors' tutors,
no heretics burned but wenches' suitors,
then shall the realm of Albion come
to great confusion.
When every case in law is right,
no squire in debt nor no poor knight,
when slanders do not live in tongues
nor cutpurses come not to throngs,
when usurers tell their gold i' the field
and bawds and whores do churches build,
then comes the time, who lives to see 't,
when going shall be used with feet.
And this prophecy Merlin shall make,
for I live before his time.
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing.
When I desire their leave that I might pity him,
they took from me the use of mine own house;
charged me, on pain of perpetual displeasure,
neither to speak of him, entreat for him,
or in any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural.
Go to; say you nothing.
There is division between the dukes
and a worse matter than that.
I have received a letter this night.
'Tis dangerous to be spoken.
I have locked the letter in my closet.
These injuries the king now bears
will be revenged home.
There is part of a power already footed.
We must incline to the king.
I will look him and privily relieve him.
Go you and maintain talk with the duke,
that my charity be not of him perceived.
If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed.
If I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
the king, my old master, must be relieved.
There are strange things toward, Edmund.
Pray you, be careful.
Here is the place, my lord.
Good my lord, enter.
The tyranny of the open night's too rough for nature to endure.
Let me alone.
Good my lord, enter here.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own.
Good my lord, enter.
Thou think'st 'tis much
that this contentious storm invades us to the skin.
So 'tis to thee.
But where the greater malady is fixed,
the lesser is scarce felt.
Thou'ldst shun a bear,
but if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth.
When the mind's free, the body's delicate.
The tempest in my mind does from my senses take all feeling
else save what beats there.
Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth would tear this hand
for lifting food to it?
But I will punish home.
No, I will weep no more.
In such a night to shut me out.
Pour on!
I will endure!
In such a night as this.
O Regan, Goneril.
Thy old kind father, whose frank heart gave all
O, that way madness lies.
Let me shun that. No more of that.
Good my lord, enter here.
Prithee, go in thyself.
Take thine own ease.
This tempest will not give me leave
to ponder on things would hurt me more.
But I'll go in.
In, boy. Go first.
You houseless poverty
nay, get thee in.
I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
Poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are,
that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
how shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
your looped and windowed raggedness
defend you from seasons such as these?
O, I have ta'en too little care of this.
Take physic, pomp.
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel
that thou mayest shake the superflux to them
and show the heavens more just.
Fathom and a half, fathom and a half!
Poor Tom!
Come not in here, nuncle!
Help me! Help me!
Give me thy hand.
Who's there?
A spirit; he says his name's poor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumble there in the straw?
Come forth!
Away!
The foul fiend follows me.
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
Ha!
Go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?
And art thou come to this?
Who gives anything to poor Tom,
whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame,
through ford and whirlipool e'er bog and quagmire,
that hath laid knives under his pillow
and halters in his pew,
set ratsbane by his porridge, made film proud of heart
to ride on a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges,
to course his own shadow for a traitor.
Bless thy five wits.
Tom's a-cold.
Ah, do de, do de, do de.
Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking.
Do poor Tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes.
There could I have him now
and there, there, there, there.
What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
Couldst thou save nothing?
Wouldst thou give them all?
Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air
hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
He hath no daughters, sir.
Death, traitor!
Nothing could have subdued nature
to such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment!
'Twas this flesh begot those pelican daughters.
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen!
Take heed o' the foul fiend. Obey thy parents.
Keep thy word justly. Swear not.
Commit not with man's sworn spouse.
Set not thy sweet heart on proud array.
Tom's a-cold.
What hast thou been?
A serving-man, proud in heart and mind
that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap,
served the lust of my mistress' heart
and did the act of darkness with her,
swore as many oaths as I spake words,
and broke them in the sweet face of heaven.
One that slept in the contriving of lust
and waked to do it.
Wine loved I deeply, dice dearly,
and in woman out-paramoured the Turk.
False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand,
hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness,
dog in madness, lion in prey.
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks
betray thy poor heart to woman.
Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets,
thy pen from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind.
Sing sum, mun, nonny.
Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa!
Let him trot by.
Thou wert better in a grave than to answer
with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
Is man no more than this?
Consider him well.
Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide,
the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume.
Ha!
Here's three on 's are sophisticated.
Thou art the thing itself.
Unaccommodated man is no more
but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art.
Off, off, you lendings!
Come unbutton here!
Be contented!
'Tis a naughty night to swim in.
Now a little fire in a dark field
were like an old lecher's heart:
a small spark, all the rest on's body cold.
Look, look, here comes a walking fire.
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet.
He begins at curfew and walks till the first cock.
He gives the web and the pin, squints the eye,
and makes the hare-lip,
mildews the white wheat,
and hurts the poor creature of Earth.
How fares Your Grace?
What's he?
Who's there?
What is't you seek?
What are you there? Your names?
Poor Tom that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water;
that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
eats cow dung for sallets,
swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog,
drinks the green mantle of the standing pool;
that is whipped from tithing to tithing
and stock-punished, and imprisoned;
that hath had three suits to his back,
six shirts to his body, horse to ride,
and weapon to wear.
But mice and rats and such small deer
have been Tom's food for seven long year.
Beware my follower.
Peace, Smulkin.
Peace, thou fiend!
What, hath Your Grace no better company?
The prince of darkness is a gentleman.
Modo he's called, and Mahu.
Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile,
that it doth hate what gets it.
Poor Tom's a-cold.
Go in with me.
My duty cannot suffer to obey
in all your daughters' hard commands.
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
yet have I ventured to come seek you out
and bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
What is the cause of thunder?
Good my lord, take his offer.
Go into the house.
I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
What is thy study?
How to prevent the foul fiend and to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
Importune him once more to go, my lord.
His wits begin to unsettle.
Canst thou blame him?
His daughters seek his death.
Oh, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banished man.
Thou sayest the king grows mad.
I'll tell thee, friend, I am almost mad myself.
I had a son, now outlawed from my blood.
He sought my life but lately, very late.
I loved him, friend no father his son dearer.
Truth to tell thee, the grief hath crazed my wits.
What a night's this.
I do beseech Your Grace贸
O, cry your mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.
This way, my lord.
In there, fellow.
Good my lord, soothe him.
Let him take the fellow!
This way! This way, fellow!
Come along with us.
Come. Come.
No words, no words. Hush!
Child Rowland to the dark tower came.
His word was still, "Fie, foh, and fum,
I smell the blood of a British man."
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
How, my lord, I may be censured,
that nature thus gives way to loyalty,
something fears me to think of.
I now perceive it was not altogether
your brother's evil disposition that made him seek his death
but a provoking merit set a-work
by a reprovable badness in himself.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just.
This is the letter he spoke of,
which approves him an intelligent party
to the advantages of France.
O heavens, that this treason were not
or not I the detector.
Go with me to the duchess.
If the matter of this paper be certain,
you have mighty business in hand.
True or false, it hath made thee earl of Gloucester.
Seek out where thy father is,
that he may be ready for our apprehension.
I will persevere in my course of loyalty,
though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
I will lay trust upon thee,
and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love.
Here is better than the open air.
Take it thankfully.
I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can.
I will not be long from you.
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
The gods reward your kindness.
Frateretto calls me
and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.
Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be
a gentleman or a yeoman.
A king, a king.
No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son,
for he's a mad yeoman
that sees his son a gentleman before him.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
come hissing in upon 'em
The foul fiend bites my back.
He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf,
a horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.
Thou, sapient sir, sit there.
Now, you she-foxes!
Look, where he stands and glares.
Want'st thou eyes at trial, madam?
Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me.
Her boat hath a leak, and she must not speak
why she dare not come over to thee.
The foul fiend haunts Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two white herrings.
Croak not, black angel; I have no food for thee.
How do you, sir?
Stand you not so amazed.
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
I'll see their trial first.
Bring in their evidence.
Thou robed man of justice, take thy place.
And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,
bench by his side.
You are o' the commission; sit you too.
Let us deal justly.
Arraign her first, 'tis Goneril.
I here take my oath before this honorable assembly,
she kicked the poor king, her father.
Come hither, mistress.
Is your name Goneril?
She cannot deny it.
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
And there's another, whose warped looks proclaim
what store her heart is made upon.
Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire!
Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why didst thou let her 'scape?
Bless thy wits.
O pity, sir, where is the patience now
that you so oft have boasted to retain?
My tears begin to take his part so much,
they mar my counterfeiting.
The little dogs and all Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart
see, they bark at me.
Tom will throw his head at them.
Avaunt, you curs!
Then let them anatomize Regan,
see what breeds about her heart.
Is there any cause in nature that make these hard hearts?
You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred,
only I do not like the fashion of your garments.
You will say they are Persian, but let them be changed.
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Hmm?
Make no noise. Make no noise.
Draw the curtains.
So.
We'll go to supper in the morning.
And I'll go to bed at noon.
Come hither, friend.
Where is the king, my master?
Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
Good friend, I prithee, take him in thine arms.
I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
There is a litter ready.
Lay him in 't and drive toward Dover, friend,
where thou shalt meet both welcome and protection.
Take up thy master.
If thou shouldst dally half an hour,
his life, with thine,
and all that offer to defend him
stand of assured loss.
Take up. Take up.
And follow me, that will to some provision
give thee quick comfort.
Oppressed nature sleeps.
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
which, if convenience will not allow,
stand in hard cure.
Come, help to bear thy master.
Come, thou must not stay behind.
Come, come, away.
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
we scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers most in the mind,
leaving free things and happy shows behind.
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er skip
when grief hath mates and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now
when that which makes me bend makes the king bow.
He childed as I fathered.
Tom, away.
Mark the high noises and thyself bewray
when false opinion,
whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe 'scape the king.
Lurk.
Post speedily to my lord your husband.
Show him this letter.
The army of France is landed.
Seek out the traitor Gloucester.
Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my displeasure.
Edmund, keep you our sister company.
The revenges we are bound to take
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding.
Advise the duke where you are going,
to a most festinate preparation.
We are bound to the like.
Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
Farewell, dearest sister.
Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.
How now? Where's the king?
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
hot questrists after him, met him at gate,
who, with some other of the lords dependants,
are gone with him towards Dover,
where they boast to have well-armed friends.
Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell, sweet lord and sister.
Go seek the traitor Gloucester.
Pinion him like a thief.
Bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
without the form of justice,
yet our power shall do a courtesy to our wrath,
which men may blame but not control.
Who's there? The traitor?
Ingrateful fox, 'tis he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What means Your Graces?
Good my friends, consider you are my guests.
Do me no foul play, friends.
Bind him, I say.
Hard.
O filthy traitor!
Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.
Villain, thou shalt find
By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
to pluck me by the beard.
So white, and such a traitor.
Naughty lady, these hairs,
which thou dost ravish from my chin,
will quicken and accuse thee.
I am your host.
With robbers' hands,
my hospitable favors you should not ruffle thus.
What will you do?
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
late footed in the kingdom?
To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king?
Speak.
I have a letter, guessingly set down,
that came from one that's of a neutral heart
and not from one opposed.
Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent the king?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover?
Wast thou not charged at peril
Let him first answer that.
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
Wherefore to Dover?
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
in his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
But I shall see the winged vengeance
overtake such children.
See't shalt thou never.
Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine, I'll set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old,
give me some help!
O cruel!
O ye gods!
One side will mock the other t'other too.
If you see vengeance
Hold your hand, my lord.
I have served you ever since I was a child,
but better service have I never given you
than now to bid you hold.
How now, you dog!
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I'd shake it on this quarrel.
What do you mean?
My villain!
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
Give me thy sword.
A peasant stand up thus!
O, I am slain!
My lord, you have one eye left to see some mischief on him.
Lest it see more, prevent it.
Out!
Vile jelly!
Where is thy luster now?
Dark and comfortless.
Where's my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
to quit this horrid act!
Out, treacherous villain.
Thou call'st upon him that hates thee.
It was he that made the overtures of thy treason to us,
who is too good to pity thee.
O my follies.
Then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me that and prosper him.
Go, thrust him out at gate.
Let him smell his way to Dover.
How is't with you, my lord?
How look you?
I have received a hurt.
Follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyeless villain.
Throw this slave upon the dunghill.
Regan, I bleed apace.
Untimely comes this hurt.
Give me your arm.
I'll never care what wickedness I do
if this man come to good.
If she live long
and, in the end, meet the old course of death,
women will all turn monsters.
I'll get some flax and whites of eggs
to apply to his bleeding face.
Now heaven help him.